>>The last time we were here
in the Cathedral of Saint
John, the Divine Senate
Hall, was in 1996
when we facilitated Terence
McKenna's final tour,
his Timewave Zero tour,
during which he explained
his mathematical formulation for
the end of history, this coming
about through
increasingly novel events,
leading to a zero-point
on December 21, 2012.
A date also called for
by Mayans and Hopis,
but prophecies unknown to
Terence during his punch card
computer formulations
using the "I Ching" back
in his early Berkeley
days in the 1960s.
So perhaps Terence was correct.
We must admit to the dramatic
increase in novel events
taking place on our
planet, many of which
appear to be contrary to life.
But at the same time, we
must admit to the many novel
events, discoveries,
insights, and dramatically
shifting perceptions that add
credence to the McKenna theory
that a new cycle, a new
reality may be in the offing.
So that is why we're
here in this place.
We are about the business
of exploring, finding,
and being novelty.
We are here to bring our
techniques of discovery
together and to possibly
assist in creating
what awaits humanity
just around the corner.
We are here to
seek understandings
and to bridge our souls,
our science, and our art
into novel explanations.
We are here to look
at what went before
and find new definitions
of ourselves in so doing.
We are here to find
fresh ideas of religion
and then to question them.
We are here to become
shamanic and poetic as well
as inquisitive and proving.
We are here to talk of
possibilities for the future
beyond 2012.
We are here to become the
prophets of a new creation.
We are here creating
the post new age.
So Terrence, whether you are
with your magnificent DMT
machine elves or in
some dimension made up
of colorful wordsmiths
talking to one another,
know that we are a novel
and rapidly growing meme.
The two panel
discussions this weekend
bring together
interpretations of realities.
And although they range from
Dr. Kaku's multiple dimensions
and superstrings to the
religions and entheogens
of Dr. Smith, they
all point well
beyond conventional
perspectives.
>>We were having a
discussion at dinner,
two perspectives about reality.
One was that we are so small
that what we do doesn't matter.
We're simply specks,
instants in a vast cosmos.
The other is that we
are one with the cosmos,
and what we do might
actually determine
how the cosmic future goes.
I don't know what
the right answer
is, but at least the second
one, you don't feel so
foolish trying to do something.
During one of the breaks earlier
today, Russell asked me, well,
how do you know that these
experiences aren't just
emanating from the
unconscious of the people?
How do you know it's
coming from outside?
And as you can expect
of a psychiatrist,
I'm not going to give a straight
answer to that question.
But I want to use it.
First of all, I think it
is not one or the other.
I think the question reflects
an either or dichotomy.
I believe there
is a way to think
of it as part of the
collective unconscious
but also as some kind
of intelligent entities
reaching us.
But in that
discussion and now, I
would turn the question
around and look
at the question from the
standpoint of the worldview
that we have that has voided the
cosmos of all entities, beings,
except-- well, treating them
as imagination, which again,
is a projection our own ideas.
But that the burden of proof
is to show that something
is on the outside rather
than asking ourselves,
how is it that we
have so rid the cosmos
of all other intelligent
life that we should even
be asking that question?
And that relates to the
question of worldviews
and how powerful
they are, and how
even though we're
trying to open them up--
and I have a great
deal of, again,
I never know whether to
thank Stan because sometimes,
when your life
changes radically,
you have mixed
feelings about it.
But through the non-ordinary
state work, the Holotropic
Breathwork, and Stan's
work, my whole worldview
fell apart beginning
quite a few years ago,
and it continues to fall apart.
But I have very great respect
for the tenacity with which
worldviews hold on in the
face of all kinds of evidence,
like Rianne Eisler
was saying, that they
don't work, that we have
to do something different,
that the dominator model
is a total failure.
It's leading to the
destruction of the planet.
Still, it holds on.
And I came across a story that I
thought illustrated this really
beautifully.
This is from a book
called "The Hiram Key"
by Chris Knight
and Robert Lomas.
The story goes like this.
"At a gathering of
rabbis, the wisemen
were debating a section of
holy law, and one of them
found himself at odds
with the rest of the group
on a point of interpretation.
He was coming under great
pressure to concede.
But he knew that he was right
and that God would therefore
be on his side.
So he called upon the Almighty
to help him prove his case.
Please, God, if I am right,
let the streams of Israel flow
uphill, the rabbi begged.
Immediately, the waters of
the land changed direction.
Unfortunately, his
adversaries were unmoved.
Please, God, the
exasperated rabbi
said again, if I am right, may
the trees bend to the ground.
And they did.
But still, his followers
were intransigent.
Dear God, he called out
in rising frustration,
may you speak aloud
and support me.
The clouds promptly parted
and a great voice from heaven
boomed forth, my friends, I
have to tell you are wrong
and he is right.
This is what I intended.
The lone elder
smiled in triumph,
but the group
remained unimpressed.
Oh, they said, we pay no
attention to heavenly voices
because the correct
determination on this point
was written down long ago."
This extraordinary
writer, Seyyed Nasr,
he said, "it is a
fact to ponder upon
that while men considered
the earth as their mother
and heaven as their father,
the earth managed to feed
the children it had begotten.
And that since men
ceased to regard
the earth as their mother but
rather as a female captured
in war to be
prostituted and raped,
the earth can no longer
feed all her progeny.
The person who speaks for the
life of the spirit today cannot
remain indifferent to the
destruction of that primordial
cathedral which
is virgin nature,
nor maintain silence concerning
the harm that man does
to himself as an immortal
being by absolutizing
the 'kingdom of man.'
" That's in quotes.
"And as a consequence,
brutalizing and destroying
everything else in the name of
the earthly welfare of members
of that kingdom."
So I think the worldview
we have of reality,
this restriction
of consciousness,
and with all that science
may have brought us,
it also has been accompanied
by a literalness,
a materialization of
the notion of reality
to the point where we are
completely cut off from so
many dimensions of reality.
And here, I would
argue with Michio
that, he's speaking again,
I think, of excitement
at the idea we're going
to conquer nature.
We're going to move out.
We're going to move out to other
planets and other galaxies.
And again, I have two
problems with that.
One is I think it still
hints to me of domination
but now extending it
out into space, which
we're hearing all too much of.
I'm sure he doesn't
mean it that way at all.
But all too much of in terms of
this militarization of space.
And also, to me,
conveys again the notion
that reality is
really restricted
to this three-dimensional
world, however vast it may be.
Whereas that might be just the
most immediate element reality
that our senses can see.
But that there are
vast domains of reality
that we can reach through
non-ordinary states from which,
again, we have been cut
off by the restriction
of consciousness that has
been the Western habit.
So those are my remarks.
>>Like John, I experienced
a major initiation
that tore apart my worldview,
my image of reality.
It happened in 1954.
When I was a beginning
psychiatrist,
I was fully committed to
Freudian psychoanalysis.
But I started experiencing
a conflict in relation
to psychoanalysis, being
constantly surprised
by the findings
of psychoanalysis
along theoretical lines into
how many different areas
psychoanalysis has
penetrated and given
seemingly brilliant
interpretations
for various obscure
areas like symbolism
of dreams, neurotic
symptoms, psychopathology
of everyday life.
Every slip of the tongue had
deep meaning, content of art,
sociopolitical
events, and so on.
But I was also becoming
aware of psychoanalysis
as a clinical tool,
when you use that system
with people who have emotional
psychosomatic problems.
And that was a very
different story.
There was a very narrow
indication range.
You had to meet special
criteria to be a good candidate.
And if you were considered
a good candidate,
you had to prepare yourself,
not for months but for years.
My own training took seven
years, three times a week.
And so I was
experiencing a conflict,
a crisis within myself.
I started regretting
that I studied
medicine and psychiatry.
My original intention was
to go to animated movies.
And I started nostalgically
thinking back.
I thought this whole thing
was a major, major error.
And then we got a box of ampules
from Sanders, which was LSD.
And they asked us if we would
experiment with this substance
and let them know if there
was any legitimate use for it
in psychiatry.
And they suggested
two different uses.
One was using LSD as
a model psychosis,
to give it to quote
unquote "normal people"
and study all kinds of things
before, during, and after.
And to get some
insight about what
might be causing these
mental aberrations
in psychotic patients.
And the second
suggestion was maybe
this could be a training
tool where psychiatrists,
psychologists could
spend a few hours
in the world of their patients.
And as a result of it,
be able to understand
them better, to communicate
with them better,
and hopefully, to be more
effective in treating them.
So I became one of
the early volunteers.
I wouldn't have missed that
opportunity for anything
in the world.
And had this very, very powerful
transforming experience.
My perceptor, the
man who got the LSD,
was also interested in EEG.
And he was interested
in, at that time,
what's called entrainment,
or driving the brain waves,
exposing people to
powerful stroboscopic light
and studying if the brain waves
in the corresponding areas
of the brain would pick up
somehow the frequency that
was being fed in.
So I had to agree to having
my EEG done before, during,
and after, but also to
have my brain waves driven
on top of that.
So when I was peeking in about
the second and the third hour
of this experiment,
a research assistant
came and said, it's time
to drive the brain waves,
took me into a
little cell, pasted
is the electrodes on my head.
I closed my eyes, and she
brought this gigantic strobe,
put it above my head,
and turned it on.
And in the next
moment, there was light
like I had never
seen in my life.
I thought, initially,
this is what
it must have looked
like in Hiroshima
when the bomb went off.
Today, I think it was
more like the dharmakaya,
the primary, clear light from
the Tibetan Book of the Dead.
Now, as a result of it, I
lost the research assistant.
I lost the clinic.
I lost Prague.
Then I lost the planet.
And then I had the feeling
that my consciousness
had absolutely no
boundaries left,
that I became commensurate
with the entire universe
and experienced this fantastic,
astronomical kind of adventure
of cosmic consciousness and
came back very, very impressed.
I had the feeling, since I
was stuck with psychiatry,
this was by far the
most interesting thing
you can do if you
are a psychiatrist,
it's to study non-ordinary
states of consciousness.
So in the last about
45 years, I have really
done, professionally, very
little else but different
things that in
one way or another
were related to these
non-ordinary states.
About half of the 45
years was clinical work
with psychedelics in Prague
and then in the United States
at the Maryland Psychiatric
Research Center.
The second half of the time,
my wife Christina and I
developed what we call
Holotropic Breathwork, where
similar kinds of experiences can
be induced by faster breathing,
by music, by certain
of body work.
And then I had a lot of
contact with anthropologists
and shamans from
different cultures,
with Thanatologists, and people
who had near death experiences.
I have also worked
with people who
had UFO abduction experiences
in psychedelic sessions,
and in the breathwork, and also
as part of spiritual emergency.
Christina and I have
done work with people
who had spontaneous episodes
of non-ordinary states.
I've been interested
in meditation, anything
that in one way or another is
related to non-ordinary states.
And during this work, I
came to the conclusion
that if we take seriously
and study systematically
what happens in these states,
that we would end up not only
with a radically different
concept of psychology,
psychiatry, psychotherapy,
but that it would radically
change the Western
philosophy of science,
that it would move us out of the
monistic, materialistic, narrow
worldview toward a worldview
that would integrate
the best of science and the
best of the mystical traditions.
>>As a physicist, I think
we are in the best of times
and the worst of times.
When I got my PhD At the
University of California
at Berkeley back in the
late '60s, early '70s,
physics was at a standstill.
The reductionist philosophy had
pretty much played itself out.
We were drowning in
subatomic particles.
We didn't know what
the hell we were doing.
It stalled.
Einstein's theory also stalled.
We had all these
fantastic predictions
of Einstein's
theory, none of which
could be tested
with the technology
of that period of time.
And we physicists were
reduced to simply giving
Greek names to all these
subatomic particles.
That's all we did.
So physics was pretty
much playing itself out.
The reductionist philosophy
had been fantastic.
We had a mechanistic
view of the world,
but we had so many quarks we
didn't know what to do with it.
We're up to 36 quarks
now, by the way.
Then we had this explosion
taking place in the last 10
years or so.
All of a sudden, the
Hubble Space Telescope
has given us gorgeous
photographs of 39 black holes
in outer space.
We can now begin to
ask the questions
that Einstein could only dream
up back in the '40s and '50s.
Is there an
Einstein-Rosen Bridge?
Is there a spinning ring at
the center of a black hole?
What lies on the other
side of a black hole
if your rocket ship is
not torn apart as you
pass through the event horizon?
All these questions were
pretty much academic
at the time of Einstein.
Now we see it.
We see these things out there.
It's a fantastic era.
Just last week, like
I said, front page
of "The New York
Times," new confirmation
of dark energy, which Nikola
Tesla could only dream about.
And now we find that dark energy
is one of the main driving
force behind the
entire universe,
driving the galaxies apart.
And then in physics,
in particle physics,
we now have string theory.
And it gives me
great gratification
knowing that when I
write down equations
on my sector of the
galaxy, that perhaps
on the other side
of the galaxy, there
is a gentleman,
or a gentlewoman,
or a gentlething
that is writing down
the same equations with
a different notation.
It's a thrill.
I have friends of mine that
write essays on Shakespeare.
And I have tremendous
reverence for Shakespeare,
but if you don't
understand English,
Shakespeare is
not that relevant.
But we're now talking about
the fundamental nature
of reality itself.
And this theory is
not reductionist.
This is a holistic
theory, because we now go
from the quarks to hyper space.
Einstein, in the last
three decades of his life,
we don't like to admit this,
but people laughed at him.
People said that he was senile.
He was over the hill.
That he was trying
to be God, he was
trying to unite all the physical
forces into one equation.
And all we see today are broken
symmetries, broken worlds.
We don't see the
symmetry of the Big Bang.
And Wolfgang Pauli,
winner of the Nobel Prize
himself, once said, quote,
what God has torn asunder
let no man put together.
But that's what Einstein
was trying to do
in his unfinished manuscript.
And today, we think
we're so close, so
close to having such
a unified framework.
And it has very little to do
with the reductionism that
allowed us to go from quarks
into the 10th dimension.
And so I think it's a
great time to be alive.
However, it's also
the worst of times.
Because we physicists also
stare into outer space.
And we dream of the
energy consumption
of civilizations perhaps a
million years ahead of ours.
We are on the threshold of
attaining type one status.
Freeman Dyson at
Princeton estimates
that we are 100, maybe 200 years
away from attaining type one
status, but we are in the
most dangerous transition
period of all time.
The generation now alive
walking the face of the Earth
is the most important
generation that
has ever walked the
face of the Earth
since modern humans emerged from
Africa about 100,000 years ago,
or since we separated
from the apes
about five million years ago.
This generation now
alive has the power
to either obliterate
the planet or to create
planetary global warming, in
which case all life on Earth
could be destroyed.
65 million years ago,
a comet or meteor
hit the Yucatan of Mexico,
wiping out the dinosaurs.
A new comet has hit the
Earth, a new comet just
as dangerous as the
one that wiped out
the dinosaurs and about
60, 70% of all life
forms 65 million years ago.
That new comet is
called Homo Sapien,
and we are creating enormous
destruction in our path.
We are a new comet that has hit
the planet Earth, destroying
life forms probably at the rate
at which the comet destroyed
life forms perhaps
65 million years ago.
However, there is
some hope in all this.
People ask what is our
place in the universe?
Where do we fit into things?
Sometimes, when you look at
night and you see the stars,
you realize the
stars are perhaps
10 to 100 light years away.
And then you see the
Milky Way Galaxy.
You see light coming
from perhaps 50,000
light years away.
There's a black hole out
there, a black hole that
blazes in Sagittarius.
It is the center all
of the galaxy itself,
a huge black hole weighing
the mass of two million suns.
And it's very easy
to feel small.
It's very easy to
feel irrelevant.
feel as if you're
some kind of cosmic mistake.
Well, I don't feel
that way at all.
First of all, I know that
the elements of my body
were forged in the
heat of a supernova.
We are literally
made out of stardust.
We are made out of
the stuff of stars.
We have a right to be
here, just like the trees.
We are part of the
fabric of existence.
And realize that
consciousness is perhaps
one of most precious of all
things produced in nature.
Believe it or not, what
rests on your shoulder,
what sits on your shoulder
is the most complex object
that nature has created
out to four light years
from the planet Earth.
I repeat, you have to
go to Alpha Centauri,
and perhaps even beyond to
our quadrant of the galaxy
to find an object
more complex than what
sits on your shoulder.
And the question that
we physicists ask
is, was it ordained?
Was it foretold?
Was it written that it
should come out this way?
There's another
problem in physics
that we don't understand.
It is called the
anthropic principle.
It has been the subject of
many rip roaring debates
between Nobel laureates.
Did the universe
know we were coming?
Some say yes.
Nobel laureate Steve
Weinberg writes at length
about the anthropic problem.
You see, in order to
have life on Earth,
in order to have
consciousness, you
have to have an enormous
series of accidents
at the fundamental
realm of nature.
You have to have
nuclei that are stable,
nuclei that condense
after the Big Bang.
You have protons that are
stable for at least three
billion years to get
DNA off the ground.
You have to have a chemistry
based on carbon with four
bonds sufficient enough to get
the amino acids, and proteins,
and nucleic acids
off the ground.
It goes on, and on,
and on-- the charge
of the electron, the mass
of the proton, the lifetime.
You write down all the
accidents that take place,
and then you realize
that all of them
had to have taken place in
order to create consciousness.
This is fantastic.
This is incredible.
Why is it that so many
constants of nature
are so fine tuned to within
a fraction of a percent
that if you change the
mass of the electron,
change a charge of the
proton, all hell breaks
loose and physical
reality dissolves?
Consciousness cannot exist
unless we have an enormous
series of miracles
that take place.
This is the anthropic
problem, and we physicists
have no answer for it.
Some people say it approves
the existence of God.
Other people say there are
parallel universes out there,
dead universes, universes
where the proton did decay,
where DNA is not stable.
And then we have to ask
ourselves the question,
is our universe special?
It's been stable for at
least 15 billion years,
sufficient for DNA to
get off the ground,
sufficient for neural
networks to create
what we call consciousness
to get off the ground.
Was it all an accident?
If it was, it's a
fantastic accident
for which we physicists
have no answer whatsoever.
In fact, if you want
to start doing physics,
and you want to start with
evidence that gives you
a wealth of scientific
information,
your first statement would
be consciousness exists.
That statement alone has an
incredible, fantastic number
of consequences.
You have to assume the nature
of subatomic particles,
the nature of atoms, the
nature of carbon bonds,
the nature of auto-catalytic
molecules-- all of that
to get 10 pounds of tissue
that sits on your shoulders
off the ground.
The meaning of life, is
there an equation up there,
an equation like e
equals mc squared,
which will change the
nature of reality itself?
Well, first of all, I
like to think of myself
as an alien who came to
Earth to watch a chess game.
If you see two people playing
stress-- and you're alien.
You're he'd never seen it happen
before-- you can gradually
figure out the rules,
but does that mean
you're a grandmaster in chess?
No.
We will figure out the rules.
We're so close at
the press time.
It could happen any day now.
We're so close to figuring
out the rules of the game.
But does that mean
we are grandmasters?
The answer is no.
This is just the beginning--
the beginning, not the end.
And second of all, what
about the meaning of life?
Is there an equation out
there that'll suddenly
answer all our cosmic questions
about love, and hatred,
and why we're here?
Well, that may be
asking too much.
I think we have to find
our own meaning in life.
It's too easy.
It's too easy if just
this one equation
is going to explain
all physical reality,
give us joy, fill our lives
with singing and rapture.
It's too easy.
We have to find our
own meaning in life.
For me, meaning of
life means at least
to fulfill whatever
talents you were
born with-- a knack for music,
a knack for mathematics,
a knack for dance-- whatever
we were blessed with,
to develop that to the
best of our ability.
And second, to make the
world a better place
than when we first entered.
That's one reason why I like
to get on radio and television
and talk to people.
Because when I was a kid,
it was so frustrating
going to the library,
asking the librarian
about the unified field
theory in the fourth dimension
and getting this blank
stare, this look.
I've seen that look so
many times in my life now.
And so what I'm
trying to tell you is,
we should leave the
world a better place
than where we started.
And on one last note,
let me say that there
are other physicists who
don't think the same way I do.
As I mentioned in
my talk, my mentor,
the person who created
me was Edward Teller.
He's the father of the hydrogen
bomb and father of the Star
Wars program.
He wanted me to go to Los Alamos
and develop third generation
hydrogen warheads.
He wanted me to help develop
the Star Wars program.
Well, what I did instead was
I went on a slightly different
career path.
And some friends of mine
decided to organize a Star Wars
boycott.
We decided to send
out a petition
among scientists, nuclear
physicists like ourselves,
stating that we will never
accept one dime for Star Wars
research, saying that we will
never accept a single dime.
The way to attain
type one status
is not to be the biggest
gun on the block.
That's not where
the world is headed.
However, James Ionson, who was
head of university research
for Star Wars.
Wars, stung by our boycott.
We got 8,000 nuclear
scientists to sign our pledge.
We had an absolute majority of
the top 20 schools in physics.
We got 19 Nobel laureates
to sign our pledge.
Well, James Ionson was--
[APPLAUSE]
Well, Mr. Ionson, head
of university research,
was stung by our boycott
pledge, and he got on television
to refute it.
And he said, yes,
these physicists
have the top people
signed up on this boycott.
But-- but two second
rate nuclear physicists
are worth just as much as one
top rate nuclear physicist.
Well, now you know why the
Star Wars program doesn't work.
It's being built by second
rate nuclear physicists.
>>You mean it would work
if they were first rate
nuclear physicists?
>>Maybe.
And our next goal is to
sign up the second rate
nuclear physicists as well.
That's our next goal.
Thank you very much.
[APPLAUSE]
>>John and Michio have
spoken very movingly
about their concern about the
world today, the world right
here that we're living in.
And Stan has spoken about
his own personal journey.
And since I managed
this afternoon
to go through 30,000 years,
actually more than that,
of history with you
in about 35 minutes,
I think in 10 minutes
I'm going to go through
with you a combination of both.
I'm going to talk to
you just very briefly
about my own spiritual
journey, but I'm
going to start with
this issue that we're
addressing here, which is
the issue of techniques
for discovery.
And I think we're all born
with one such technique,
and it's our intuition.
It's that intuition that
we all come equipped with.
And those of us who have had
the joy and the opportunity
to really go deeply and to try
to access our own inner wisdom,
very, very often, we've come
to the same conclusions,
that we're interconnected,
that that striving for oneness
that we all have, for
connection with one another,
with those that we love,
as well as with that which
we call the divine,
that this is really
intrinsic to our humanity.
And that our destiny,
to use a term
that you've used here in
your brochures, on this Earth
is not to destroy but to create.
Because we're equipped with this
incredible, incredible capacity
as human beings to create and
with this incredible capacity
to love.
And by love, I really
mean the giving
of love, the nurturing capacity,
the caregiving capacity
for which, by the
grace of evolution,
we humans receive biochemical
rewards of immense pleasure.
Our brains are so
wired that we get
these biochemical rewards that
we feel euphoric, don't we?
Somebody with a
little baby, if you've
ever really held a little
baby or nursed a little baby,
you know the euphoria of
that caring connection.
And it's not just
exclusive to mothers.
I see so many of
the fathers today
who are breaking through
the psychic armoring,
this terrible psychic
armoring that's
imposed on men through what
I've identified as a dominator
model, and the joy
that they experience.
And of course we
experience it with a lover.
We experience it with a friend.
Even when we take care of a dog
or a cat that we care about.
So we're equipped with this.
So my questions then
has been, for me,
why, if we are equipped
with this, if intuitively we
have through the eons
wanted-- I mean what do we
human beings really want?
They want to live in peace.
They want love.
They want security.
They want pleasure.
And if we're equipped with these
tremendous capacities for all
of this?
What is the problem?
And of course that led
to me from an inquiry
into biological matters.
And I should say
something very interesting
to you, because some of the
most interesting work that
has come out from biology about
this striving for connection
has come from women--
Lynn Margulis, Mae-Wan Ho.
And I think it's not that
women are better about things,
but women are brought up
in a dominator culture
to be interested in
connection, in relationships,
whereas men in that
kind of culture
are much more brought
up for achievement.
I'm going to do this.
And it's not, by the way,
at all gender specific.
Because my dear friend Humberto
Maturana, who is a man,
writes movingly and beautifully
about the biology of love.
This is something
that's built into us,
but it takes some escaping
from the gender programming
to really recognize this.
All right.
So my work then--
and my work came out
of some very personal,
emotional, and spiritual events
in my life.
Perhaps the most profound
spiritual crisis for me
came after the Second World War.
I was a little kid, and
every night my father and I
used to pray the Shemah Yisrael.
And then after that-- and
it was a wonderful ritual
of bonding between us.
And after that,
as children will,
very carefully, I prayed
for every single member
of our family that
had been left behind
in Nazi Europe-- everyone.
I was terrified to forget one.
You know how kids
are about that.
And then I saw the newsreels
of the concentration camps.
And I-- well, it was
extremely painful,
because God died for me.
I mean, it was very
painful for me.
Because it was like, OK.
Is God crazy or just evil?
I mean, those seemed to me
to be the only alternatives.
Because if this creature
who is all powerful,
that I had been taught, all
knowing, could let this happen,
then something was very
wrong with the perspective
that I had been given about
what the heck reality is about.
And I went through a long and
very painful spiritual journey.
And it was really,
in many ways--
and this takes me right back
to my research-- inextricably
connected with another
technique for discovery.
Because every scientist knows
that science and intuition
are not separate.
A scientist has an intuition,
and then the scientist
sets out there to
figure out, hey,
is there any empirical
evidence for this intuition?
I mean, do I have something that
can either verify it or forget
it?
So my intuition that there had
to be alternatives to this,
but that it wasn't going to
come from God, that it would
come from right here, from us.
Right here.
To shift then from
biological issues-- I mean,
we're prewired.
We're prewired.
We can be very, obviously,
very cruel world,
but we can be so kind.
And it is not true, as some
of these new evolutionary
psychologists and
social biologists
would have it, that love and
altruism are purely based
on wanting to pass on our genes.
Because I know of people
in Nazi Europe who
risked-- because the
Nazis were very clear.
They said you're going
to die if you help a Jew
and so is your entire family.
So there goes your
gene pool, right?
And they did it.
And when you ask them
afterwards why did you do it?
They said, well, I just had to.
It was in me.
So I know that we all
have this capacity.
So the question then
is-- and that led me
to the study of
cultural evolution,
and I shared with
you earlier some
of my technique for
discovery, which was really
looking at a much larger
database that includes
the whole of history,
including prehistory,
that includes the
whole of humanity,
both its female and
male halves, and that
also includes the spheres
of life where we all live,
not just politics,
economics, you know,
the abstract things that
are up there somewhere.
But how do we relate
as human beings
in our intimate relations, in
our parent-child relations,
in our gender relations?
And I saw these patterns then.
And what I can tell you
is that analytic lens
that came out of my research
of what I call the partnership
dominator continuum has been
an invaluable tool for me
for my own spiritual
and emotional healing.
And I can only
tell you that being
able to see that we have these
possibilities, that there
is a wider lens, that we can
look at, and that, really,
gene expression-- I don't
know how many of you
are familiar with that
term, but we haven't really
changed our genes that we know
of for a goodly period of time,
OK?
So the issue here
is not biological.
The issue is what of
our genetic repertoire,
from caring to cruelty, is going
to be expressed or inhibited?
And so the issue for
us-- and I just really
feel so passionately
about this--
is to create the
conditions beginning
with partnership child care.
Because dominator
child care replicates
this misery, this misery from
generation to generation.
Secondly, gender relations.
How can we possibly talk
about valuing diversity
if, for example, we have a
school curriculum, still,
at this day and age, where
the female half of the species
is practically invisible?
That doesn't make sense.
Because when you make the
female half invisible,
guess what you also do?
You not only do
value women, but you
devalue those traits
and characteristics
that are stereotypically in the
dominator mindset associated
with women and femininity.
And what are those qualities?
You've got it-- caring,
non-violence, empathy,
caregiving.
So if we really want
to see gene expression
of this incredible
capacity-- and I want
to see it as a grandmother.
I look at my little
grandchildren.
They are born with this
joy, with this thirst
for learning, for love.
And they can give it to you.
I mean, they just
give so much love.
It's so natural if they get if
they get partnership parenting
and partnership care, if we
don't take it away from them,
if we don't make them adapt.
Because learning can be our
downfall too as a species.
If we don't make them
learn dominator behaviors
by the way that we treat
them and by the stories
that we tell them.
Well, there's so much
more I could say to you,
but I do want to
say that, for me,
if we're talking about
techniques of discovery,
we've got them.
We've got our intuition.
We've got our brain.
And we've got the
capacity to get
rid of a lot of the
blinkers that we've
been brought up with with
which to look at reality.
And really that's what this is
all about, isn't it right now?
It's opening up the lens wider,
opening up our human capacity
wider, and beginning
to sort out-- because I
want to end with this.
I believe that we can talk
about healing ourselves
from here to eternity,
but if we only
focus on healing ourselves,
and the context of the society
continues to be a
dominator context,
it is literally like going
up on a down escalator.
You simply spend all your
time just trying, trying, to
not really sink.
And you can't break
free from this.
But only if we change the
institutions-- family,
education-- and then politics
and economics actually follow.
Because if we give value
to caring and caregiving
in our schools, we're
not going to have such
an uncaring economic system.
If we get rid of myths that
one kind of person, a woman,
is put on Earth just to
serve another kind, which
is a terrible model for
inequitable economics,
If we get rid of
that, well, we can
realize all this
tremendous yearning
for oneness, the
tremendous capacity
that we have for caring,
for creativity, for love.
[APPLAUSE]
>>My path has been
from the hard sciences.
My degree's in the
earth sciences.
I'm a geologist by
trade, although I
haven't been a geologist,
technically, for quite a while.
And then I moved into the
aerospace sciences, and then
the communications sciences,
with a little startup company
out of Stanford University.
It became Cisco Systems
in the early '90s.
And what I'm hearing on the
panel here this evening,
I think, is a beautiful example
of what happened in my life
as well.
When I was working in the Earth
sciences back in the mid 1970s,
I was seeing data
come across my desk,
real time, saying to me that the
Earth is changing very rapidly,
that the magnetic
fields of the Earth,
for example, are declining
very, very quickly right now,
and that base resonant
frequencies were increasing.
And I'd see this on
the computer every day,
and I'd go to the people in the
offices next to me and I'd say,
Earth magnetics are changing.
What does this mean to us?
And they would
almost predictably,
what I would get was, they
would say don't ask me.
I'm an Earth scientist.
Go ask somebody that
knows about life science.
So I would ask my
life science friends
what it means to a human
body or to human cells when
the planetary magnetics decline
as rapidly as they are right
now?
And they'd say, we were
never trained in that.
We don't know.
Go ask someone else.
And I think that's an example
of what we're seeing here.
Because what we're
speaking about tonight,
to find the kinds of answers
that we're asking ourselves,
we have to move to an
interdisciplinary science.
We've got to move out the boxes
that we placed ourselves into.
And of course, that's happening.
It's happening very
quickly right now.
So as we're moving toward
these kinds of questions,
and as Michio so beautifully
and eloquently summarized,
this generation, we take for
granted so often the power
that we have in this generation.
The end of 1999, just
before the millennium,
there was a group of some of
the leading minds in our world--
spiritual leaders, scientists,
researchers, philosophers,
medical people--
that came together.
And they were asked what
we could expect over
these next few years
of our new millennium.
And almost universally,
without having discussed
this among themselves, these
researchers and the panel,
the faculty, said
that they expected
within the first 15 to 20
years of the new millennium,
humankind would be faced with
the greatest challenges ever
posed to our kind, and that
we have at our fingertips
a technology now
unlike any technology
that we have in
recorded history.
And I'm going to be very
careful about how I say that.
As far as we know, we've never
had the kind of technology
that we have right now.
It's the technology
for the first time
that allows us to create a
permanent change in our world,
whether that change
is obliterating all
that we love and hold dear, or
whether that change is forever
healing and relieving the
suffering of the masses.
It's a choice that's being made
by this generation right now.
And many of the people we've
worked with in the past
have felt that science is to
blame for many of the problems
that we have.
What we know is that it is
technology that is actually
pushing us to the place
where we must define
the very parameters that allow
us to answer the questions
we're asking.
Technology is pushing
us to understand
what the human soul is all
about and where it comes from,
what consciousness means,
what our mind is all about.
Because it's the technology
that's racing so quickly.
For example, when we
clone another human being,
does that clone have a soul?
Or when we clone an organ,
does that organ have a soul?
The epidemics of disease
that are expected
in the next 15 or
20 years, there
are predictions that as much of
2/3 of the world's population
will be lost primarily
in third world countries
due to diseases, some of them
we haven't even recognize yet.
And all of these things that
the science researchers were
saying, they expect
to see happen.
The interesting thing.
As they were voicing their
concerns, was every one of them
suggested that our
technology will fail us
in the presence of
these great challenges.
They said that the
technology we have now
will not know what to
do with the conditions,
with the challenges
that we're faced with.
Well, in my years
as a geologist,
I began going into the
oldest texts of humankind
in search for another
kind of answer
that I believe we'll bring
to bear this weekend.
And many people
believe, and I know
you've heard from some
of the previous speakers,
that sometimes we see a
disparity between what
we call science and
spiritual traditions,
or science and religion.
How many of you in this
audience-- this is the quiz--
how many of you believe
that science and religion
are saying the same thing?
How many of you believe that?
Don't say that
just because you're
in the Prophets Conference.
You really believe that?
Do you believe so much so
that perhaps some of our most
ancient traditions
may hold the keys
to some of our greatest
scientific and technical
discoveries?
Do you believe that?
That's my belief as well.
So my path has been
to go into the most
ancient records of our kind.
Because here's what I
believe has happened.
Somewhere between 6
and 8,000 years ago,
the ancients are very clear
that the wisdom of the heavens
was given to the
people of this world.
That's what my talk
is about tomorrow.
The wisdom of the
heavens was given
to the people of the Earth
in a language of their time
6,000 years ago.
That wisdom was passed
down in that same language.
It's a language that
means less to us
today than it did 6,000 years
ago, although the wisdom is
more complete on the one hand.
On the other hand,
science, modern science
and the scientific method,
within the last 500 or 600
years has now begun to
rediscover principles
that were handed in
that original wisdom,
although they are
not continuous.
They're little bits and pieces.
And as we strive to unify the
scientific principles, what
I believe we're seeing is
that if we have the wisdom
to recognize the
language, there's
an ancient wisdom that's
giving us those principles.
We can translate back and forth.
So what I'll say this
evening-- and this
is in response to
what you were saying.
It's no accident that we
had the conversation the way
we had it-- is that those most
ancient traditions say that it
is within each of you,
within each of us,
that we have the power to unify
the four forces of creation,
that within each of us, we
touch the power of gravity,
electromagnetics, and the strong
and the weak nuclear forces.
And the only way that we
can touch those forces
is to attain a level
of consciousness
that we call, by various
names-- love, compassion,
understanding,
forgiveness, tolerance.
Those are the names that we give
to the feeling in our bodies
that creates the biological
and the physical effects
that we're now
seeing mirrored back
to us in the world around us.
So some of those texts, some
of the most fascinating to me,
say we ask this question,
why are we here?
And of the many reasons we're
here, there appears to be--
and this is from the ancient
Essenes, those who transcribed
the Dead Sea Scrolls.
What they say to us is
that we came to this world
intentionally for one reason
above all other reasons.
We came here to love and to find
the love in this world greater
than the love of the
angels of the heavens.
It's the language
that they're using.
And they go on to say that
every time-- and this may
help to explain, although
not justify, your question--
that every time
we push ourselves
to the very edge of who we
believe we are in this world--
has anybody ever been
pushed to the edge of who
you believe you are?
See, now I always have
to ask the questions.
Anybody over the edge right now?
Is anybody too shy to tell us
you're over the edge right now?
It's OK.
They say that every
time we push ourselves
to the very edge of
who we believe we are,
that the only way
that we can survive
is through our power to love
as individuals and as masses.
And when we look at our history,
and we look at the culture,
and what we've done unto
ourselves, what we know
is we have a tremendous
capacity to love.
It may be that by understanding
the inner technology that
brought each of
us into this room
this evening, that
we then have the keys
for the outer technology that
science so strives to unify,
and that as we discover the
language is one and the same,
what we find is that our
capacity, our ability to love,
is the common theme
that runs through so
many of those
ancient traditions,
that, in fact,
they were giving us
the keys to changing our
biology, to changing our DNA.
And now we know.
They said that the
world around us
is simply a mirror of what
we have become from within,
through the stuff that
the superstrings create,
through what we now call
the quantum hologram,
the mirror of creation.
Creation simply
shows back to us what
we have become from within.
If we have the wisdom
to recognize that,
I believe that we have honored
our kind, of our species,
our history.
And I believe that's where
we're going with this discussion
tonight.
And I think that's where
we're going with our lives
in general.
Thank you for the
opportunity to share this.
[APPLAUSE]
>>Thank you.